>> Woodruff: THE MERGER BETWEEN
AMERICAN AIRLINES AND U.S.
AIRWAYS HIT SOME TURBULENCE
TODAY.
THE U.S. JUSTICE DEPARTMENT AND
SEVERAL STATE ATTORNEYS GENERAL
ARE SUING TO BLOCK THE DEAL.
GOOD EVENING.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Brown: AND I'M JEFFREY BROWN.
ON THE NEWSHOUR TONIGHT, THE
SURPRISE LEGAL CHALLENGE CLAIMED
THE MERGER WOULD INCREASE AIR
FARES AND CUT SERVICES.
WE EXPLORE THE FIGHT OVER
CREATING THE WORLD'S LARGEST
AIRLINE.
>> Woodruff: THEN, NORTH
CAROLINA JOINED A GROWING LIST
OF STATES TO PASS A VOTER I.D.
LAW.
WE DEBATE THE MEASURE, THE FIRST
SINCE A LANDMARK RULING ON
VOTING RIGHTS BY THE SUPREME
COURT.
>> Brown: NEW YORKERS WEIGH THE
PROS AND CONS OF THE CITY'S
STOP AND FRISK POLICY.
WE GET REACTION TO A JUDGE'S
ORDER TO LIMIT THE PROGRAM.
>> Woodruff: DESPITE DIRE
WARNINGS, EGYPT'S GOVERNMENT HAS
YET TO CRACK DOWN ON MASS-
PROTESTS SUPPORTING THE OUSTED
PRESIDENT.
MARGARET WARNER TALKS WITH
EGYPT'S FOREIGN MINISTER.
>> Brown: NEW EDUCATION
STANDARDS TAKEN UP BY MANY
STATES OUTLINE WHAT KIDS SHOULD
LEARN BUT NOT HOW.
JOHN MERROW LOOKS AT TEACHERS
AND STUDENTS ADJUSTING TO "THE
COMMON CORE."
>> WITH MATHEMATICS, IT USED TO
BE THIS IS HOW YOU DO IT, HERE
ARE YOUR STEPS, IF YOU DON'T DO
IT THAT WAY, YOU'RE WRONG.
NOW THE COMMON CORE SAYS DO IT
ANY WAY YOU WANT, JUST BE ABLE
TO DO IT AND JUSTIFY YOUR
ANSWER.
>> Woodruff: AND LUCK STRIKES 16
MAINTENANCE WORKERS IN NEW
JERSEY.
WE HEAR FROM THE GROUP WHO
RECENTLY WON A BIG LOTTERY
JACKPOT.
THAT'S ALL AHEAD ON TONIGHT'S
NEWSHOUR.
>> Brown: THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
JUSTICE MOVED TODAY TO BLOCK THE
LATEST AND LARGEST MERGER IN THE
AIRLINE WORLD.
IT MEANS THE DEAL JOINING
AMERICAN AIRLINES AND U.S.
AIRWAYS MAY BE GROUNDED
PERMANENTLY.
( LAUGHTER )
IT WAS ALL SMILES AND BACKSLAPS
SIX MONTHS AGO AS THE AIRLINES'
C.E.O.s ANNOUNCED PLANS TO
MERGE.
>> THIS REALLY IS ABOUT TAKING
TWO AIRLINES, PUTTING THEM
TOGETHER AND PROVIDING BETTER
SERVICE TO OUR CUSTOMERS.
OUR VIEW IS, IT INCREASES
COMPETITION, DOESN'T DECREASE
COMPETITION.
>> Brown: BUT TODAY, THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT SAID IT WILL HURT
COIT
JUSTICE, AND ATTORNEYS GENERAL
FROM SIX STATES PLUS THE
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, FILED SUIT
IN FEDERAL COURT TO GROUND THE
$11 BILLION MERGER AT THE 11th
HOUR.
THE DEPARTMENT SAID SUCH A
MERGER WOULD LEAVE JUST THREE
SO-CALLED "LEGACY" CARRIERS AND
MAKE FLYING MORE EXPENSIVE.
THE "NEW AMERICAN" WOULD HAVE
BEEN THE WORLD'S LARGEST
CARRIER, DOMINATING SOME U.S.
DOMESTIC MARKETS.
AT WASHINGTON'S REAGAN NATIONAL
AIRPORT, IT WOULD CONTROL 69% OF
THE SPACE AND 63% OF THE ROUTES.
IN A CONFERENCE CALL WITH
REPORTERS, ASSISTANT ATTORNEY
GENERAL WILLIAM BAER SAID THE
MERGER WOULD "SUBSTANTIALLY
LESSEN COMPETITION."
HE LABELED THE DEAL "PRETTY
MESSED UP; IT'S BAD FOR
CONSUMERS."
FOR ITS PART, A.M.R., THE PARENT
COMPANY OF AMERICAN SAID IN A
STATEMENT:
EMPLOYEES, CREDITORS AND
SHAREHOLDERS OF THE TWO
AIRLINES, PLUS THE EUROPEAN
UNION, HAD ALREADY OKAYED THE
DEAL.
AND THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT DID
APPROVE A SERIES OF EARLIER
DEALS, INCLUDING DELTA'S
ACQUISITION OF NORTHWEST IN
2008, UNITED'S MERGER WITH
CONTINENTAL IN 2010, AND
SOUTHWEST AIRLINES' PURCHASE OF
AIR TRAN A YEAR AFTER THAT.
PHIL MATTINGLY IS COVERING THE
STORY FOR BLOOMBERG NEWS AND
JOINS ME NOW.
PHIL, THIS CAME AS A SURPRISE AT
LEAST FOR THOSE OF YOU FOLLOWING
THIS.
>> EXACTLY.
LOOK AT THE MARKETPLACE.
U.S. AIRWAYS DOWN 13% TODAY,
A.M.R. DOWN IN OVER-THE-COUNTER
TRADING.
WE SPOKE TO SOME ANALYSTS WHO
WERE RATING THIS A 99% CHANCE
THIS DEAL WOULD APPROVED AND
THERE'S A REASON.
THERE'S REALLY NO PRECEDENT FOR
THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT TO STEP
IN.
AS WAS MENTIONED, WE'VE HAD A
SERIES OF BIG MERGER DEALS
CONSOLIDATIONS IN THIS INDUSTRY.
I DON'T THINK ANYBODY EXPECTED
THIS.
>> Brown: TELL US ABOUT THE
REASONING OF THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT.
WHAT SPECIFICALLY DID THEY SAY
WOULD MAKE THIS ANTICOMPETITIVE?
>> THE ANTITRUST CHIEF HAD A
CALL WITH REPOERS,RT HE SAID
ONE, THIS IS GOING TO INCREASE
FARES, INCREASE THE FEES THAT I
THINK FRUSTRATE EVERYBODY ON
BAGS, LEG ROOM, THAT SORT OF
THING, BUT IT WILL LEAD THE
AIRLINES TO DECREASE SERVICE IN
SOME SPECIFIC AREAS.
MOST IMPORTANTLY, I THINK WHEN
YOU LOOK AT U.S. AIRWAYS, THEY
HAVE A PROGRAM THEY'VE BEEN
UTILIZING WHERE THEY LOOK TO
DELIBERATELY UNDERCUT THESE
LEGACY AIRLINE, THE THREE
AIRLINES THEY COMPETE WITH ON
ONE STOP FLIGHTS, TRYING TO
UNDERCUT NONSTOP FLIGHTS.
THEY'RE SAYING THERE'S NO MORE
ECONOMIC RATIONALE IF THIS DEAL
GOES THROUGH FOR U.S. AIRWAYS TO
CUT THAT PROGRAM.
>> Brown: WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
D.O.J., DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE,
BUT STATES AND THE DISTRICT OF
COLUMBIA, WHAT ARE THEY ARGUING?
>> THERE'S STATE INTERESTS HERE.
YOU LOOK AT HUBS, DIRECT
FLIGHTS, YOU HAVE TEXAS WHICH,
ODDLY ENOUGH IN THE LAST COUPLE
WEEKS, HAS NOT BEEN THE GREATEST
FRIEND OF THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT.
THEIR ATTORNEY GENERAL WAS HAPPY
TO GET ON BOARD ON THIS.
OBVIOUSLY DALLAS BEING THE
HEADQUARTERS.
SO WHAT YOU HAVE IS YOU HAVE
STATE INTERESTS, YOU'VE GOT
JOBS, PRESTIGE AND STATES REALLY
SEE THIS AS AN OPPORTUNITY TO
GET ON BOARD AND BLOCK SOMETHING
THAT WILL HAVE A NEGATIVE IMPACT
ON THEIR STATE ECONOMY.
>> Brown: PART OF THE
REASONING FROM JUSTICES SAYING
THAT THESE TWO ARE BIG AND
STRONG YOU HAVE NO GO IT ALONE
IN SPITE OF WHAT THEY THEMSELVES
SAY, I GUESS, RIGHT?
>> RIGHT.
IT'S AN INTERESTING STATEMENT
BECAUSE AMERICAN AIRLINES,
OBVIOUSLY, IS COMING OUT OF
BANKRUPTCY RIGHT NOW.
ACTUALLY, IN 48 HOURS THEY'RE
SUPPOSED TO INTRODUCE THEIR
REORGANIZATION PLAN FOR APPROVAL
IN NEW YORK.
>> Brown: THE TIMING IS QUITE
INTERESTING.
>> VERY INTERESTING.
BUT SOMETHING TO THINK ABOUT
OVER THE LAST COUPLE QUARTERS,
EVEN AFTER A DECADE OF BIG
LOSSES, THE AIRLINE INDUSTRY HAS
DONE GREAT, AND THAT INCLUDES
AMERICAN AIRLINES AND USAIR BOTH
WITH RECORDS NUMBERS OVER THE
LAST COUPLE QUARTERS.
>> Brown: AS WE SAID AND YOU
REPEATED, THE DEPARTMENT HAS
APPROVED A NUMBER OF BIG MERGERS
IN THE LAST FEW YEARS SO TODAY
HOW ARE THEY DIFFERENTIATING
THIS ONE FROM THOSE?
>> IT'S INTERESTING, BILL BEAR,
THE CHIEF OF THE ANTITRUST
DIVISION, SAID WE LOOK AT EACH
CASE ON A DEAL-BY-DEAL BASIS.
HOWEVER, WE LOOKED AT -- WHILE
THEY WERE DOING THIS, DURING THE
INVESTIGATION THEY LOOKED BACK
AT THE DEALS THAT HAVE LED UP TO
THIS ONE, THAT HAVE LED UP TO
THE CURRENT CONSOLIDATION AND
WHAT HE SAID WAS BASICALLY WE
HAVE FOUND THIS MARKETPLACE TO
BE ANTICOMPETITIVE RIGHT NOW.
SO WHILE THEY MIGHT NOT BE
REGRETTING THOSE DEALS OR TRYING
TO LOOK BACK AND SET NEW
PRECEDENT, THEY ARE DECIDING
THOSE DEALS, WHILE THEY MIGHT
HAVE THOUGHT THEY WERE OKAY AT
THE TIME, HAVE LED THEM TO
BECOME A MAJOR PROBLEM FOR THIS
CURRENT MERGER.
>> Brown: IT'S INTERESTING
BECAUSE THEY'RE SAYING "YES, WE
ALLOWED THOSE, THOSE WERE FINES
BUT NO MORE NOW BECAUSE OF THE
WORLD THAT'S BEEN CREATED
BECAUSE OF THOSE."
>> AND ANALYSTS ARE TRYING TO
FIGURE IF THIS IS THE NEW
PARADIGM.
WITH WE SHIFTING FROM A TIME
WHERE THESE MERGERS BECAUSE OF
THE GOOD OF THE INDUSTRY THE
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT WAS HAPPY TO
LET THESE GO THROUGH?
GENERALLY VERY QUICK WITH FEW
CHANGES IF ANY AT ALL.
ARE WE TO THE POINT WHERE
MERGERS ARE DONE?
THIS IS ONE MERGER TOO MANY?
>> Brown: AMERICAN SAYS IT'S
GOING TO APPEAL.
WHAT DOES THAT MEAN?
WHAT HAPPENS NEXT?
>> WELL, WE KNOW THE PROCESS IS
IS THAT THESE GUYS HAVE BEEN IN
THE ROOM, BOTH COMPANIES AND THE
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT, HAVE BEEN IN
THE ROOM FOR THE MONTHS LEADING
UP TO THIS KIND OF PRESENTING
THEIR PROPOSALS, THEIR
ARGUMENTS.
WHAT AMERICAN AIRLINES SAID
TODAY THROUGH THEIR STATEMENT
THROUGH A.M.R. IS THEY SAID THIS
IS GOING TO COURT NOW.
THEY FEEL GOOD, I THINK U.S.
AIRWAYS ALSO HAD A STATEMENT OUT
WHERE THEY WERE SAYING THIS
DELAYS THINGS FOR A BIT BUT WE
FEEL GOOD.
COMPANIES HAVE COME THROUGH THIS
BEFORE.
NOW, THERE'S A COUPLE OF ISSUES
THAT COME UP.
ONE IS THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT
SAYS THEY WANT THIS IN COURT,
THEY BELIEVE THE BEST INTEREST
IS TO STOP THIS.
THIS ALSO SETS THEM UP FROM A
NEGOTIATING PERSPECTIVE TO MAYBE
TAKE OUT CERTAIN PARTS, REQUIRE
CHANGES TO THIS DEAL, REQUIRE
CONCESSIONS BEFORE THEY ALLOW
THIS GOING FORWARD.
>> Brown: SO IT COULD STILL GO
FORWARD.
IN THE MEANTIME, THE AIRLINES,
CONSUMERS AND TRAVELERS, WHAT,
STATUS QUO?
>> PRETTY MUCH.
SO CONSUMER ADVOCATES THRILLED
WITH THIS.
THEY'VE BEEN POINTING TO THE
CONSOLIDATION IN THE MARKETPLACE
SAYING THIS IS PLAYING A BIG
ROLE IN THOSE BAG FEES EVERYBODY
HATES.
THEY'RE THRILLED RIGHT NOW.
IN TERMS OF THE BIG CHANGES, ARE
WE GOING TO SEE WHEN YOU GO
ONLINE AT KAYAK.COM ARE YOU
GOING TO SEE BIG CHANGES?
NOT AT THE MOMENT.
I THINK BOTH AIRLINES FEEL LIKE
THEY'VE GOT A GOOD ARGUMENT THAT
THIS IS A PRO-COMPETITIVE MERGER
THAT WOULD ACTUALLY BRING DOWN
PRICES.
WE'LL SEE IF THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT AGREES.
>> Brown: LET ME ASK YOU
BRIEFLY.
YOU COVER DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE.
HOW DOES THIS DECISION FIT INTO
ANY LARGER ANTITRUST STRATEGY
THAT YOU WATCHED OVER THE LAST
FEW YEARS?
IT IS A SURPRISE IN THAT CONTEXT
OR DOES IT FIT?
>> IT'S INTERESTING.
THE DIVISION AT THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT IS UNDER NEW
LEADERSHIP.
OVER THE LAST EIGHT MONTHS
THEY'VE GOT A NEW HEAD.
IT'S AGGRESSIVE, VETERAN
GENTLEMAN IN BILL BEAR, HE'S GOT
A LOT OF EXPERIENCE AND WHILE HE
REALLY IS KIND OF COMPLEMENTED
AROUND THE LEGAL ARENA FOR BEING
FAIR, EVERYBODY ALMOST TO A
PERSON SAYS HE'S AGGRESSIVE AND
I THINK HE'S BROUGHT A NEW TACT,
A NEW PERSPECTIVE TO DIVISION
AND WHILE IT WON'T BE A MASSIVE
SHIFT IN POLICY, I THINK THEY'RE
LOOKING FOR OPPORTUNITIES TO GET
IN AND CHALLENGE ISSUES IF THEY
FEEL LIKE THEY'RE
ANTICOMPETITIVE.
>> Brown: PHIL MATTINGLY OF
BOMBELORG NEWS, THANKS SO MUCH.
Wo>>odruff: STILL TO COME ON
TEW
VOTING RIGHTS IN NORTH CAROLINA;
NEW YORKERS RESPOND TO "STOP AND
FRISK"; EGYPT'S FOREIGN
MINISTER; A NEW STANDARD FOR
PUBLIC EDUCATION; AND THE STORY
OF SOME LUCKY LOTTERY WINNERS.
BUT FIRST, THE OTHER NEWS OF THE
DAY.
HERE'S KWAME HOLMAN.
>> Reporter: THE GOVERNMENT OF
ISRAEL ANNOUNCED TODAY IT'S
MOVING AHEAD WITH PLANS TO BUILD
NEARLY 900 NEW HOMES IN EAST
JERUSALEM.
THE STATEMENT COMES A DAY BEFORE
PEACE TALKS ARE SET TO RESUME.
THE NEWS WAS CRITICIZED BY
PALESTINIANS, AND U.S.
SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN KERRY
SAID HE'D HAD A "VERY FRANK"
DISCUSSION WITH ISRAELI PRIME
MINISTER BENJAMIN NETANYAHU.
KERRY SPOKE AS HE TRAVELED IN
BRAZIL.
>> LET ME MAKE IT CLEAR, THE
POLICY OF THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA WITH RESPECT TO ALL
SETTLEMENTS IS THAT THEY ARE
ILLEGITIMATE.
AND WE OPPOSE SETTLEMENTS TAKING
PLACE AT ANY TIME, NOT JUST THE
TIME OF THE... OF THE PEACE
PROCESS.
>> Reporter: IN A SEPARATE MOVE,
ISRAEL CARRIED OUT A PROMISE
THAT LED TO THE PEACE
NEGOTIATIONS BY RELEASING 26
PALESTINIAN PRISONERS.
BUSES LEFT A PRISON IN CENTRAL
ISRAEL AFTER NIGHTFALL.
THE INMATES HAD BEEN HELD ON
CHARGES RANGING FROM ROCK-
THROWING TO DEADLY BOMBINGS.
THE ISRAELI MILITARY SHOT DOWN A
ROCKET LAUNCHED AT A RESORT TOWN
NEAR THE EGYPTIAN BORDER TODAY.
THE ATTACK TARGETED EILAT ON THE
RED SEA.
OFFICIALS SAID IT'S THE FIRST
TIME ISRAEL'S IRON DOME DEFENSE
SYSTEM HAD INTERCEPTED A ROCKET
THERE.
MILITANTS BASED IN EGYPT'S SINAI
PENINSULA CLAIMED RESPONSIBILITY
FOR THE ATTACK.
ANOTHER APPARENT U.S. DRONE
STRIKE IN YEMEN KILLED TWO MORE
MILITANTS LATE MONDAY.
IT BRINGS TO 37 THE NUMBER
BELIEVED KILLED IN THE LAST TWO
WEEKS AMID WARNINGS AL QAEDA IN
THE ARABIAN PENINSULA WAS
PLANNING ATTACKS IN THE REGION.
THE GROUP IS CONSIDERED THE MOST
DANGEROUS BRANCH OF THE TERROR
NETWORK.
THE U.S. EMBASSY IN YEMEN
REMAINS CLOD ASSE A RESULT OF
THE THREAT.
IN ECONOMIC NEWS, RETAIL SALES
EDGED HIGHER IN JULY BY 0.2%.
THE INCREASE POINTED TO HIGHER
CONSUMER SPENDING.
AND ON WALL STREET, STOCKS
INCHED A LITTLE HIGHER, AS WELL.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
GAINED 31 POINTS TO CLOSE AT
15,451.
THE NASDAQ ROSE 14 POINTS TO
CLOSE AT 3,684.
THOSE ARE SOME OF THE DAY'S
MAJOR STORIES.
NOW, BACK TO JUDY.
>> Woodruff: AND WE TURN TO
A STRICT NEW VOTER I.D. LAW IN
NORTH CAROLINA, WHICH IS PUTTING
A SPOTLIGHT ON THE BROADER
NATIONAL FIGHT OVER WHEN AND
WHERE PEOPLE CAN CAST BALLOTS.
>> PROTECTING THE INTEGRITY OF
EVERY VOTE CAST IS AMONG THE
MOST IMPORTANT DUTIES I HAVE AS
GOVERNOR.
AND IT'S WHY I SIGNED THESE
COMMONSENSE, COMMONPLACE
PROTECTIONS INTO LAW.
>> Woodruff: PAT McCRORY, NORTH
CAROLINA'S FIRST REPUBLICAN
GOVERNOR IN MORE THAN TWO
DECADES, DEFENDED THE NEW LAW
LAST NIGHT IN A STATEMENT POSTED
ON YOUTUBE.
UNDER THE STATUTE, VOTERS WILL
HAVE TO PRESENT A GOVERNMENT-
ISSUED PHOTO I.D. SUCH AS A
DRIVER'S LICENSE AT THE POLLS.
THE LAW ALSO ENDS SAME-DAY VOTER
REISTRGATION, AND IT SHORTENS
THE EARLY VOTING PERIOD BY A
WEEK.
REPUBLICAN STATE SENATOR BOB
RUCHO ARGUED THE MEASURE WILL
HELP PREVENT VOTER FRAUD WHEN IT
TAKES EFFECT IN 2016.
HE SAID:
OPPONENTS INSIST THE REAL INTENT
IS TO SUPPRESS TURNOUT AMONG
DEMOCRATIC CONSTITUENCIES,
MINORITIES, YOUNG VOTERS AND THE
POOR.
IN RALEIGH TODAY, THE NATIONAL
ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT
OF COLORED PEOPLE ANNOUNCED
PLANS TO CHALLENGE THE LAW IN
FEDERAL COURT.
>> THIS BILL IS NOT ABOUT VOTER
I.D.
IT IS 57 PAGES OF REGRESSIVE,
UNCONSTITUTIONAL ACTS TO RIG AND
MANIPULATE ELECTIONS THROUGH
VOTER SUPPRESSION.
>> Woodruff: POSSIBLE
PRESIDENTIAL CONTENDERS ARE
WEIGHING IN, AS WELL.
FORMER SECRETARY OF STATE
HILLARY CLINTON, A DEMOCRAT,
SHARPLY CRITICIZED THE LAW LAST
NIGHT IN SAN FRANCISCO.
>> CITIZENS WILL BE
DISENFRANCHISED, VICTIMIZED BY
THE LAW, INSTEAD OF SERVED BY
IT.
AND THAT PROGRESS, THAT
HISTORICAL PROGRESS TOWARD A
MORE PERFECT UNION WILL GO
BACKWARDS INSTEAD OF FORWARD.
>> Woodruff: IN FACT, NORTH
CAROLINA IS THE LATEST OF
SEVERAL STATES WITH REPUBLICAN-
CONTROLLED LEGISLATURES MOVING
TO TIGHTEN VOTER RULES.
JUST TODAY, THE AMERICAN CIVIL
LIBERTIES UNION WARNED KANSAS
THAT IT MUST COMPLY WITH FEDERAL
VOTER LAW OR FACE LEGAL ACTION.
AND U.S. ATTORNEY GENERAL ERIC
HOLDER SIGNALED LAST MONTH THAT
THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT WILL
CHALLENGE SUCH LAWS, BUT THAT
WILL BE FAR HARDER NOW SINCE THE
U.S. SUPREME COURT STRUCK DOWN
PART OF THE VOTING RIGHTS ACT IN
JUNE.
WE GET TWO TAKES NOW ON THE
VOTER I.D. LAW IN NORTH
CAROLINA.
REPUBLICAN STATE REPRESENTATIVE
TOM MURRY IS A CO-AUTHOR OF THE
MEASURE, AND DEMOCRATIC U.S.
REPRESENTATIVE G.K. BUTTERFIELD
IS A FORMER NORTH CAROLINA
SUPREME COURT JUSTICE AND CRITIC
OF THE NEW LAW.
GENTLEMEN, WE WELCOME YOU BOTH
TO THE NEWSHOUR.
>> THANK YOU.
>> THANKS FOR US.
>> Woodruff: REPRESENTATIVE
MURRY, WHY WAS IT NECESSARY TO
REFORM THE STATE'S VOTING LAW?
>> I THINK VOTER CYD ONE OF
THOSE SUBJECTS THAT IS SO COMMON
SENSE THAT MOST PEOPLE IN NORTH
CAROLINA WONDERED WHY WE DIDN'T
DO IN THE THE FIRST PLACE.
I'M PROUD THAT NORTH CAROLINA
HAS JOINED THE 34 OTHER STATES
TO ENACT A COMMON-SENSE ROAD IS
VOTER I.D. LAW THAT ISN'T GOING
TO IMPACT A SIGNIFICANT AMOUNT
OF NORTH CAROLINIANS.
WHAT WE IDENTIFIED WHEN WE WERE
ANALYZING THIS BILL IS THAT 97%
OF THE PEOPLE THAT VOTED IN
TWELVE HAD A DIRECT MATCH IN THE
DIVISION OF MOTOR VEHICLES
DATABASE.
SO WE'RE WILLING TO WORK OVER
THE NEXT FEW YEARS TOWARDS 2016
TO MAKE SURE THAT ANYONE THAT
NEEDS A PHOTO I.D. CAN GET ONE
AND WE'RE WILLING TO GIVE THEM
ONE FOR FREE AS WELL.
>> Woodruff: BUT WHY WAS IT
NECESSARY?
>> I THINK THAT'S A QUESTION
THAT YOU SHOULD ASK THE PUBLIC.
THE PUBLIC, IF YOU ASK -- AND
THAT'S WHAT I DID.
I WENT DOOR TO DOOR IN MY
CAMPAIGN, WE DID FOCUS GROUPS
AND TALKED TO FOLKS.
IT'S JUST ONE OF THOSE
COMMON-SENSE THINGS THAT VOTERS
IN NORTH CAROLINA THOUGHT WE
ALREADY HAD.
I'VE SEEN NUMEROUS PEOPLE COME
TO THE POLLS IN NORTH CAROLINA
AND PRESENT THEIR I.D. EXPECTING
TO BE ASKED FOR IT.
SO IT'S KIND OF ONE OF THOSE
COMMON SENSE THINGS TO MAKE
SENSE TO 60% TO 70% OF THE
VOTERS IN NORTH CAROLINA SO IT'S
A GOOD COMMON-SENSE POLICY FOR
OUR STATE.
>> Brown: CONGRESSMAN
BUTTERFIELD, HE'S SAYING IT'S
COMMON SENSE AND SOMETHING MOST
NORTH CAROLINIANS WANT.
>> FIRST, LET ME THANK YOU FOR
PUTTING THE SPOTLIGHT ON THIS.
IT'S SHAMEFUL THAT OUR
LEGISLATURE AND THE GOVERNOR
HAVE DECIDED TO MAKE THESE
RADICAL CHANGES IN THE ELECTION
LAWS.
THERE IS NO NEED FOR A VOTER
I.D. LAW IN NORTH CAROLINA.
WE HAVE FOUR MILLION PEOPLE WHO
VOTE IN EVERY PRESIDENTIAL
ELECTION AND LESS THAN A DOZEN
REPORTS OF VOTER FRAUD.
WE CAN SEE RIGHT THROUGH THIS.
WE KNOW EXACTLY WHAT IT IS.
IT'S A POLITICAL POWER GRAB ON
THE PART OF THE REPUBLICANS.
FOR YEARS AND YEARS REPUBLICANS
WERE SHUT OUT OF THE POLITICAL
PROCESS IN NORTH CAROLINA AND SO
THEY ARE DETERMINED NOW TO
CONTROL THE LEGISLATURE, THEY
WON THE ELECTIONS IN 2010 AND
GOVERNMENT McCORI WAS ELECTED
IN 2012 AND IT'S THEIR
DETERMINATION TO HOLD ON TO THIS
POWER THAT THEY HAVE ACQUIRED.
IT'S DISCRIMINATORY, IT
DISENFRANCED SO MANY PEOPLE IN
OUR STATE, IT WILL COST A LOT OF
MONEY TO ENFORCE IT AND SHAME ON
NORTH CAROLINA FOR MAKING THIS
HAPPEN.
>> Brown: LET ME ASK YOU
REPRESENTATIVE MURRY ABOUT
SEVERAL OF THOSE POINT THAT IT'S
A POLITICAL POWER GRAB.
THAT THERE REALLY ARE VERY FEW
EXAMPLES OF VOTER FRAUD AND THAT
THIS IS JUST AN OVERREACTION.
>> I DON'T THINK IT'S AN
OVERREACTION.
AND WHAT WE'VE SEEN FROM OTHER
STATES THAT ARE SIMILARLY
SITUATED TO NORTH CAROLINA AND
PROBABLY HET STATE TO LOOK AT
THE CLOSEST THAT RESEMBLES NORTH
CAROLINA IS GEORGIA WHERE WE'VE
SEEN THEIR VOTER I.D. LAW BE IN
PLACE SINCE 2008 AND WE'VE SEEN
TURNOUT AMONGST MINORITIES
INCLUDING AFRICAN AMERICANS AND
HISPANICS GO UP SINCE THE VOTER
I.D. LAW WENT INTO PLACE.
ANOTHER THING ABOUT THE GEORGIA
EXPERIMENT THAT WE'VE SEEN IS
OVER THE FIVE YEARS THAT THEY'VE
HAD THE LAW IN PLACE, LESS THAN
-- BETWEEN 30,000 AND 40,000
FREE I.D.s HAVE BEEN ISSUED BY
THE STATE OF GEORGIA.
SO THE IMPACT HASN'T BEEN THAT
GREAT.
THAT'SLESS THAN -- THAT'SLESS
THAN 1% OF THE REGISTERED VOTERS
IN THE STATE OF GEORGIA AND I
THINK YOU'RE GOING TO SEE A
SIMILAR EXPERIENCE HERE IN NORTH
CAROLINA AND SO WHEN YOU'RE
TALKING ABOUT A COMMON-SENSE
MEASURE LIKE VOTER I.D. THAT 60%
TO 70% OF THE VOTERS IN NORTH
CAROLINA APPROVE OF, I THINK
IT'S A STEP IN THE RIGHT
DIRECTION TO IMPROVE THE VOTING
PROCESS AND IMPROVE EVERYBODY'S
SENSE OF INTEGRITY AND HAVE
CONFIDENCE IN THE ELECTION
RESULTS.
>> Woodruff: CONGRESSMAN
BUTTERFIELD, I THINK I HEARD
REPRESENTATIVE MURRY SAY IN THE
STATE OF GEORGIA WHEN THE VOTER
I.D. ACT WAS PASSED TURNOUT
AMONG AFRICAN AMERICANS
INCREASED.
>> LET ME TELL YOU, NORTH
CAROLINA HAS HAD A GOOD
PARTICIPATION RATE OVER THE
YEARS.
THE FORMER GOVERNOR AND THE
NORTH CAROLINA LEGISLATURE HAVE
WORKED HAND IN HAND TO
LIBERALIZE AND TO MAKE THE
BALLOT BOX ACCESSIBLE AND TO
MINORITY GROUPS AND TO WOMEN AND
TO STUDENTS AND SENIOR CITIZENS.
WE HAVE BEEN A MODEL FOR THE
NATION AND NOW TO IMPLEMENT A
VOTER I.D. LAW IS GOING TO
RESULT IN 300,000 PEOPLE WHO DO
NOT HAVE ANY FORM OF
GOVERNMENT-ISSUED IDENTIFICATION
TO BE DISENFRANCHISED.
THE LEGISLATURE SAYS WELL, THEY
CAN GET A SPECIAL I.D. CARD.
WELL, MANY PEOPLE WILL NOT DO
THAT.
THEY WILL CHOOSE NOT TO VOTE AND
THAT'S VERY SAD.
AND THE STATE'S EVEN SAYING NOW
THEY WILL PAY FOR A VOTER I.D.
CARD.
AND THE STATISTICS SHOW IT'S
GOING TO COST $800,000 TO
IMPLEMENT A VOTER I.D. CARD
PROGRAM.
COMPLETELY UNNECESSARY.
>> Woodruff: ANOTHER ASPECT OF
THIS LAW I WANT TO ASK YOU ABOUT
REPRESENTATIVE MURRY IS THE FACT
THAT IT DOES AWAY WITH -- IT
DOES AWAY WITH SAME-DAY VOTER
REGISTRATION BUT IT ALSO
SHORTENS THE EARLY VOTING PERIOD
BY A WEEK.
IT WAS 17 DAYS, NOW IT IS 10
DAYS.
WHY MAKE IT HARDER FOR PEOPLE TO
VOTE EARLY?
>> EARLY VOTING IS EXTREMELY
POPULAR, AND WHAT WE'VE DONE
WITH THIS MEASURE IS TO MAKE
SURE THAT THE SAME NUMBER OF
HOURS OF EARLY VOTING WERE THAT
WERE AVAILABLE IN 2010 AND 2012
ARE GOING TO BE AVAILABLE GOING
FORWARD.
SO WHAT WE'RE DOING IS ACTUALLY
BROADENING THE NUMBER OF
LOCATIONS THAT PEOPLE WILL BE
ABLE TO ACCESS EARLY VOTING
BECAUSE ONE WAY THAT SOME
ENTERPRISING ELECTION OFFICIALS
WERE TRYING TO GAME THE SYSTEM
WAS TO HAVE ONE LOCATION ONLY
ACCESSIBLE TO A CERTAIN VOTER
BLOCK AND THAT CUTS ACROSS BOTH
PARTY LINES AND SO THE BEST WAY
TO STOP THE GAMING OF THE SYSTEM
IS TO MAKE SURE IF YOU'RE GOING
TO HAVE MULTIPLE EARLY VOTING
LOCATIONS YOU OPEN THEM UP ALL
AT THE SAME TIME, ALL WITH THE
SAME NUMBER OF HOURS SO IT'S
GOING TO BE MORE FAIR FOR VOTERS
TO HAVE MULTIPLE LOCATIONS FOR
EARLY VOTING.
>> Woodruff: YOU HEAR WHAT
HE'S SAYING.
>> TT'SHA NOT NOTHING BUT A
PRETEXT FOR VOTING SUPPRESSION.
THE EARLY VOTING DAYS HAVE NOT
BEEN SUFFICIENT.
THE LINES HAVE BEEN LONG AND WE
ACTUALLY NEED MORE VOTING DATES,
NOT LESS.
AND CUTTING IT BACK TO TEN DAYS
IS NOTHING BUT A MOVE TO
SUPPRESS THE AFRICAN AMERICAN
VOTE, THE YOUTH VOTE.
>> WHAT WE NEED IS MORE VOTING
LOCATIONS.
ROUGH RIFF LET HIM FINISH.
>> WHAT THE REPRESENTATIVE
DIDN'T SAY IS THEY ALSO
ELIMINATED SUNDAY VOTING AND WE
KNOW IN ALL OF THE PARTICULARLY
SOUTHERN STATES AFRICAN AMERICAN
VOTE VOTE IN HIGHER NUMBERS ON
SUNDAY BEFORE THE ELECTION.
>> Woodruff: WHAT ABOUT HIS
POINT THAT THEY ARE ADDING MORE
PLACES TO VOTE?
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
>> THEY ARE GIVING THE
DISCRETION TO ADD MORE PLACES.
THEY HAVE NOT ESTABLISHED MORE
EARLY VOTING SIGHTS.
IT IS ENABLING MORE VOTING SITES
AT THE SAME TIME REDUCING IT TO
THE TEN-DAY WINDOW.
THIS IS TAKING ATWAY RIGHT TO
VOTE.
REPUBLICANS HAVE BEEN DOING THIS
FOR A LONG TIME.
THE T THING THAT HAS STOOD IN
THEIR WAY HAS BEEN THE VOTING
RIGHTS ACT.
ON JUNE 25, THE COURT STRUCK
DOWN SECTION 4 OF THE VOTING
RIGHTS ACT AND 30 DAYS LATER,
JULY 35, THAT'S WHEN THE
LEGISLATURE PASSED THESE
SWEEPING CHANGES AND NOW THERE'S
NO OVERSIGHT FROM THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT.
THAT'S WHY I'M CALLING ON
ATTORNEY GENERAL HOLDER TO LOOK
AT THIS CASE VERY CAREFULLY AND
TO CONSIDER FILING A LAWSUIT.
>> Woodruff: REPRESENTATIVE
MURRY, JUST QUICKLY, IT IS -- WE
KNOW THAT IN VOTING LAST YEAR
THAT OF THE EARLY VOTING
SOMETHING LIKE 70% OF AFRICAN
AMERICANS TOOK ADVANTAGE OF
EARLY VOTING IN THE LAST FEW
ELECTIONS.
LARGER THAN OTHER VOTERS.
YOU CAN UNDERSTAND WHY THIS
LOOKS LIKE AN EFFORT TO CUT BACK
ON MINORITY VOTING.
>> WHAT WE WANT IS MORE
LOCATIONS FOR EVERYONE TO VOTE
EARLY AND THAT'S WHAT WE'RE
TRYING TO ACHIEVE.
AND I'LL ISSUE A CHALLENGE TO
CONGRESSMAN BUTTERFIELD.
I'D LIKE TO JOIN WITH HIM TO
MAKE SURE THAT IF WE CAN
IDENTIFY ANYONE THAT NEED A
PHOTO I.D. BETWEEN NOW AND
JANUARY 1 OF 2016 I HOPE HIS
CONGRESSIONAL OFFICE AND MY
LEGISLATIVE OFFICE CAN WORK
TOGETHER TO MAKE SURE THAT
ANYBODY THAT NEEDS AN KIDD GET
ONE BY JANUARY 1, 2016.
WILL YOU WORK WITH ME ON THAT,
CONGRESSMAN?
>> WELL, REPRESENTATIVE, WE'RE
GOING TO TRY TO GET THIS LAW
OVERTURNED.
THE VOTING RIGHTS ACT IS STILL
ENFORCEMENT, WE'RE GOING TO TRY
TO PURSUE A SECTION 2 CLAIM
UNDER THE VOTING RIGHTS ACT.
THIS IS CLEARLY NOT ONLY A
DISCRIMINATORY IMPACT ON
MINORITY VOTERS BUT IT HAS A
DISCRIMINATORY INTENT AND WE'RE
NOT GOING TO JUST SIT BY AND
WATCH IT HAPPEN.
>> Woodruff: CONGRESSMAN
BUTTERFIELD, REPRESENTATIVE
MURRY, WE THANK YOU BOTH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Brown: AND WE TURN NOW TO THE
NEW YORK POLICE DEPARTMENT'S
STOP-AND-FRISK PROGRAM, A POLICY
THAT A FEDERAL DISTRICT JUDGE
YESTERDAY SAID UNFAIRLY TARGETS
MINORITIES.
CORRESPONDENT WILLIAM BRANGHAM
SPOKE WITH NEW YORKERS ABOUT THE
RULING AND HOW THE PROGRAM HAS
IMPACTED THEIR COMMUNITIES.
HERE IS HIS REPORT.
>> Reporter: IT WAS THE MIDDLE
OF A SUMMER NIGHT, SEVEN YEARS
AGO ON NEW YORK CITY'S UPPER
WEST SIDE.
NICHOLAS PEART WAS OUT
CELEBRATING HIS 18th BIRTHDAY
WITH A FRIEND AND A COUSIN.
THEY'D GONE TO GET A BURGER AT
THE LOCAL McDONALD'S, BUT IT WAS
CLOSED, SO THEY SAT DOWN ON THIS
BENCH.
THAT'S WHEN THE TROUBLE STARTED.
>> SUDDENLY AND OUT OF NOWHERE,
THESE SQUAD CARS PULL UP TO US.
COPS CAME OUT OF THOSE CARS,
DEMANDED WE GET ON THE GROUND.
>> Reporter: BUT YOU WEREN'T
DOING ANYTHING WRONG?
>> WASN'T DOING ANYTHING WRONG.
WE WEREN'T DRINKING, HADN'T BEEN
DOING ANYTHING EXCEPT SITTING ON
THE BENCHES LATE AT NIGHT.
>> Reporter: NICHOLAS IS NOW 24,
A COLLEGE GRADUATE.
HE WORKS FOR A NON-PROFIT GROUP
IN HARLEM.
HE SAYS HE'S BEEN STOPPED MAYBE
TEN TIMES IN HIS LIFE-- HE SAYS
ALL OF THEM FOR NO REASON.
HE SAYS HE'S NEVER BEEN
ARRESTED, NEVER BEEN CHARGED
WITH ANY CRIME AT ALL.
>> I'VE PRETTY MUCH LOST TRACK
OF HOW MANY TIMES I'VE BEEN
STOPPED.
IT'S SORT OF LIKE A RITE OF
PASSAGE FOR A LOT OF BLACK AND
BROWN BOYS IN DIFFERENT
NEIGHBORHOODS AROUND THE CITY.
>> Reporter: HOW MANY TIMES HAVE
YOU BEEN STOPPED BY THE POLICE?
>> WELL IN THE DOUBLE DIGITS,
LIKE, 3-4 TIMES A YEAR.
>> Reporter: 25-YEAR-OLD DAVID
OURLICHT, ALSO A COLLEGE
GRADUATE WHO'S NOW APPLYING TO
LAW SCHOOL, SAYS HE'S ALSO LOST
TRACK OF HOW MANY TIMES HE'S
BEEN STOPPED AND FRISKED BY NEW
YORK CITY POLICE OFFICERS.
>> A LOT OF THESE STOPS HAVE
BEEN ME WALKING HOME FROM
SCHOOL, YOU KNOW, WHEN I WAS
GOING TO ST. JOHNS, OR ME
HELPING A FRIEND MOVE, OR ME
JUST ME WALKING OUTSIDE MY
HOUSE.
>> Reporter: HOW DO YOU EXPLAIN
THAT?
>> UH...
HOW DO I EXPLAIN BEING...
I DON'T KNOW, IT'S HARD TO
EXPLAIN.
>> Reporter: BOTH OF THESE MEN
WERE AMONG THE PLAINTIFFS IN THE
CLASS ACTION LAWSUIT BROUGHT
AGAINST THE CITY OF NEW YORK'S
STOP AND FRISK POLICY.
>> WHEN I GOT THE CALL THIS
MORNING, THE FIRST THING I DID
WAS CRY.
>> Reporter: YESTERDAY, A
FEDERAL DISTRICT COURT JUDGE
RULED THAT POLICE OFFICERS IN
NEW YORK CITY HAVE FOR YEARS
EN
MINORITY MEN WITHOUT REASONABLE
SUSPICION THAT THOSE MEN WERE
DOING ANYTHING WRONG.
JUDGE SHIRA SCHEINDLIN SAID NEW
YORK'S STOP AND FRISK POLICY
VIOLATED THE FOURTH AMENDMENT'S
PROTECTION AGAINST UNREASONABLE
SEARCH AND SEIZURE, AND AMOUNTED
TO RACIAL PROFILING.
"NO ONE SHOULD LIVE IN FEAR OF
BEING STOPPED WHENEVER HE LEAVES
HIS HOME TO GO ABOUT THE
ACTIVITIES OF DAILY LIFE," THE
JUDGE WROTE.
"DURING THESE STOPS,
MINORITIES," SHE ADDED, "WERE
MORE LIKELY TO BE SUBJECTED TO
THE USE OF FORCE THAN WHITES,
DESPITE THE FACT THAT WHITES ARE
MORE LIKELY TO BE FOUND WITH
WEAPONS OR CONTRABAND."
WHILE NOT BANNING STOP AND FRISK
OUTRIGHT, THE JUDGE ORDERED A
SERIES OF CHANGES: OFFICERS IN
SOME PRECINCTS WILL WEAR MINI-
CAMERAS ON THEIR VESTS TO
DOCUMENT ENCOUNTERS.
SHE ORDERED A SERIES OF
COMMUNITY MEETINGS TO GET INPUT
ABOUT POSSIBLE CHANGES TO THE
POLICY, AND SHE APPOINTED A
FEDERAL MONITOR TO OVERSEE THOSE
CHANGES.
THE JUDGE'S RULING PROMPTED AN
ANGRY RESPONSE FROM NEW YORK
CITY POLICE COMMISSIONER RAYMOND
KELLY.
>> WHAT I FIND MOST DISTURBING
AND OFFENSIVE ABOUT THIS
DECISION IS THE NOTION THAT THE
N.Y.P.D. ENGAGES IN RACIAL
PROFILING.
THAT SIMPLY IS RECKLESSLY
UNTRUE.
WE DO NOT ENGAGE IN RACIAL
PROFILING.
IT IS PROHIBITED BY LAW, IT IS
PROHIBITED BY OUR OWN
REGULATIONS.
WE TRAIN OUR OFFICERS THAT THEY
NEED REASONABLE SUSPICION TO
MAKE A STOP, AND I CAN ASSURE
YOU THAT RACE IS NEVER A REASON
TO CONDUCT A STOP.
THE N.Y.P.D. IS THE MOST
RACIALLY AND ETHNICALLY DIVERSE
POLICE DEPARTMENT IN THE WORLD.
>> Reporter: AT THE SAME NEWS
CONFERENCE, NEW YORK MAYOR
MICHAEL BLOOMBERG SAID STOP AND
FRISK HAS PLAYED AN IMPORTANT
ROLE IN THE CITY'S DRAMATIC
REDUCTION IN VIOLENT CRIME,
INCLUDING MURDER, SINCE HIS
ADMINISTRATION BEGAN THE
PRACTICE A DECADE AGO.
>> EVERY DAY, COMMISSIONER KELLY
AND I WAKE UP DETERMINED TO KEEP
NEW YORKERS SAFE AND SAVE LIVES.
OUR CRIME STRATEGIES AND TOOLS,
INCLUDING STOP-QUESTION-FRISK,
HAVE MADE NEW YORK CITY THE
SAFEST BIG CITY IN AMERICA.
IN FACT, MURDERS ARE 50% BELOW
THE LEVEL THEY WERE 12 YEARS AGO
WHEN WE CAME INTO OFFICE,
SOMETHING NO ONE THOUGHT
POSSIBLE BACK THEN.
STOP-QUESTION-FRISK, WHICH THE
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED
STATES HAS FOUND TO BE
CONSTITUTIONAL, IS AN IMPORTANT
PART OF THAT RECORD OF SUCCESS.
IT HAS TAKEN SOME 8,000 GUNS OFF
THE STREET OVER THE PAST DECADE
AND SOME 80,000 OTHER WEAPONS.
>> KEDRICK WAS AN INNOCENT KID
WHO GOT CAUGHT IN THE CROSSFIRE.
>> Reporter: SHEE JENOHNSON
LIVES IN JAMAICA, QUEENS, THE
SAME NEIGHBORHOOD WHERE DAVID
OURLICHT SAYS HE WAS STOPPED AND
FRISKED SEVERAL TIMES.
SHE WANTS THE POLICE TO TREAT
EVERYONE FAIRLY, BUT SHE WISHES
STOP AND FRISK WAS EVEN MORE
VIGOROUSLY ENFORCED.
HAD IT BEEN, SHE THINKS IT MIGHT
HAVE SAVED THE LIFE OF HER 17-
YEAR-OLD SON KEDRICK.
HE WAS SHOT AND KILLED AT A
PARTY THREE YEARS AGO.
>> IF THE MURDERER, THE GUY WHO
KILLED MY SON HAD BEEN STOPPED
AND FRISKED, KEDRICK MIGHT BE
ALIVE TODAY.
>> Reporter: JOHNSON BELIEVES
THE VIEWS OF PEOPLE LIKE HER,
PEOPLE WHO HAVE SEEN THE IMPACT
OF VIOLENT CRIME UP CLOSE, ARE
OFTEN IGNORED IN THE DEBATE OVER
THE CONSTITUTIONALITY OF STOP
AND FRISK.
>> COMPLAINING IS EASY, BUT JUST
SITTING BACK AND DOING NOTHING
THAT'S JUST A WHOLE OTHER THING.
YOU DO HAVE CASES WHERE THE
POLICE DEPARTMENT HAVE GONE
OVERBOARD, BUT IT'S ALL ABOUT
BEING FAIR AND NOT TAKING PEOPLE
RIGHTS AWAY, BUT AT THE SAME
TIME PROTECTING THE INNOCENT
ONES LIKE KEDRICK.
>> Reporter: DEFINING WHAT'S
FAIR AND WHAT'S EFFECTIVE,
BALANCING PUBLIC SAFETY WITH
INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS, IS THE HEART
OF THE DEBATE OVER STOP AND
FRISK.
CRITICS POINT OUT THAT ONLY A
VERY SMALL PERCENTAGE OF STOP
AND FRISK ACTIONS RESULT IN THE
SEIZURE OF WEAPONS OR DRUGS OR
OTHER CONTRABAND.
FOR EXAMPLE, THIS STUDY SHOWED
THAT FOR THE HUNDREDS OF
THOUSANDS OF STOPS THAT OCCURRED
IN 2008, ONLY 6% RESULTED IN
ARRESTS, UNDER 2% YIELDED ANY
CONTRABAND, AND ONLY ABOUT 0.1%
OF STOPS TURNED UP GUNS.
DESPITE THAT, THE NUMBER OF STOP
AND FRISKS HAS GONE UP
SIGNIFICANTLY SINCE THE PROGRAM
BEGAN.
THE CITY COUNTERS BY SAYING THAT
THE NUMBER OF STOP AND FRISKS
HAVE DROPPED SHARPLY IN THE LAST
YEAR AFTER NEW TRAINING WAS
GIVEN TO OFFICERS ABOUT WHAT
CONSTITUTES REASONABLE SUSPICION
FOR STOPS AND SEARCHES.
MAYOR BLOOMBERG SAYS THE
PRACTICE HAS TAKEN THOUSANDS OF
GUNS OFF CITY STREETS, AND, HE
ARGUES, THE VERY EXISTENCE OF
THE PROGRAM DISCOURAGES WOULD-BE
CRIMINALS.
>> TODAY, WE HAVE THE LOWEST
PERCENTAGE OF TEENAGERS CARRYING
GUNS OF ANY MAJOR CITY ACROSS
OUR COUNTRY, AND THE POSSIBILITY
OF BEING STOPPED ACTS AS A VITAL
DETERRENT, WHICH IS CRITICALLY
IMPORTANT BY-PRODUCT OF STOP-
QUESTION-FRISK.
THE FACT THAT FEWER GUNS ARE ON
THE STREET NOW SHOWS THAT OUR
EFFORTS HAVE BEEN SUCCESSFUL,
AND THERE IS JUST NO QUESTION
THAT STOP-QUESTION-FRISK HAS
SAVED COUNTLESS LIVES.
AND WE KNOW THAT MOST OF THE
LIVES SAVED, BASED ON THE
STATISTICS, HAVE BEEN BLACK AND
HISPANIC YOUNG MEN.
>> Reporter: THE MAYOR AND THE
POLICE CHIEF BOTH ARGUE THAT
STOP AND FRISK IS AN ESSENTIAL
PART OF THEM DOING THEIR JOB OF
KEEPING NEW YORKERS SAFE, AND
THEY SAY IT MIGHT BE HARD FOR A
LOT OF YOUNG MEN WHO GET CAUGHT
UP IN THIS, BUT THAT'S AN OKAY
PRICE TO PAY FOR THE DROP IN
CRIME. THAT'S THEIR ARGUMENT.
WHAT DO YOU MAKE OF THAT?
>> I THINK, THE CRIME RATE IS
DOWN IN ALL THE MAJOR CITIES,
YOU KNOW, WITHOUT STOP AND
FRISK.
I THINK ITS IMPORTANT TO NOTE,
THIS IS NOT JUST A MINOR
INCONVENIENCES, THIS ARE NOT
JUST MINOR INCONVENIENCES; THESE
STOPS ARE VERY HOSTILE.
IT'S VERY DAMAGING TO THE
COMMUNITY.
>> Reporter: DAVID OURLICHT, THE
YOUNG MAN WHO'S LOST TRACK OF
HOW MANY TIMES HE'S BEEN STOPPED
BY NEW YORK CITY POLICE, SAYS
THESE EXPERIENCES HAVE POISONED
HIS RELATIONSHIP WITH
AUTHORITIES, AND HE SAYS IT'S
DONE THE SAME FOR THOUSANDS OF
YOUNG MEN IN HIS COMMUNITY.
>> I THINK THAT THAT CREATES
DISTRUST WITHIN THE COMMUNITY
BECAUSE, YEAH, WE ALL WANT SAFE
THINGS, BUT I DON'T WANT MY SON
OR MY CHILD OR MY UNCLE OR MY
NIECE OR MY NEPHEW OR ANYONE IN
MY FAMILY TO HAVE TO BE ABUSED.
>> Reporter: BUT MAYOR
BLOOMBERG, THE MAN WHO PRESIDES
OVER THE NATION'S BIGGEST CITY,
SAYS THAT PUTTING RESTRICTIONS
ON STOP AND FRISK POSES ITS OWN
DANGERS.
HE SAYS CITIZENS SHOULDN'T FEEL
LIKE TARGETS OF THE POLICE, BUT
THEY ALSO SHOULDN'T BE VICTIMS
OF VIOLENT CRIME.
>> Brown: THE MAYOR ALSO VOWED
THE CITY WOULD REPEAL THE
JUDGE'SULIN RG.
>> Woodruff: WE RETURN NOW TO
EGYPT WHERE THERE WERE CLASHES
AGAIN TODAY AS THE STALEMATE
OVER PROTEST CAMPS CONTINUED.
MARGARET WARNER REPORTS.
>> Warner: TENSIONS BOILED OVER
IN THE STREETS OF CAIRO AGAIN
TODAY AS FIGHTING ERUPTED
BETWEEN SUPPORTERS AND OPPONENTS
OF OUSTED PRESIDENT MOHAMED
MORSI.
A FEW THOUSAND MORSI SUPPORTERS
MARCHED TO THE INTERIOR
MINISTRY, AND, BEFORE LONG, BOTH
SIDES WERE THROWING ROCKS AS
POLICE FIRED TEAR GAS TO TRY TO
QUELL THE FRACAS.
IT CAME AS THE STAND-OFF
CONTINUED OVER TWO MASSIVE SIT-
IN PROTEST CAMPS OF MORSI
FOLLOWERS.
THEY REMAINED DEFIANT AFTER
SECURITY FORCES FAILED TO MOVE
AGAINST THEM AS EXPECTED AGAIN
TODAY.
>> ( translated ): WE WILL NOT
LEAVE THE CAMP.
WE ARE HERE UNTIL WE ACHIEVE OUR
DEMANDS-- FREEDOM, LEGITIMACY
AND THAT MORSI BE RETURNED TO
POWER-- OR WE DIE HERE.
>> Warner: THE MILITARY-BACKED
INTERIM GOVERNMENT VOWED LAST
WEEK TO USE FORCE IF NEEDED TO
CLEAR THE CAMPS, BUT IT HAS YET
TO FOLLOW THROUGH ON THE THREAT.
THE STATE-RUN "AL-AHRAM"
NEWSPAPER REPORTED TODAY THAT
THE NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
MET LATE INTO THE NIGHT BUT WAS
STILL DIVIDED ON HOW TO HANDLE
THE PROTESTS.
MEANWHILE, THE MUSLIM
BROTHERHOOD'S SPOKESMAN SAID IT
IS READY TO TAKE PART IN
POLITICAL TALKS MEDIATED BY AL-
AZHAR UNIVERSITY, EGYPT'S
LEADING RELIGIOUS AUTHORITY, BUT
HE INSISTED ANY SUCH TALKS MUST
BE BASED ON WHAT HE CALLED THE
"RESTORATION OF CONSTITUTIONAL
LEGITIMACY," A CLEAR REFERENCE
TO MORSI'S STATUS AS THE
COUNTRY'S ELECTED PRESIDENT.
I'M JOINED NOW BY EGYPTIAN
FOREIGN MINISTER NABIL FAHMY
FROM CAIRO.
MINISTER FAHMY, THANKS FOR BEING
WITH US.
IT APPEARS THAT YOUR GOVERNMENT
IS HOLDING OFF FOR NOW USING
FORCE TO DISPERSE THESE TWO
SIT-INS.
IS THAT THE CASE?
IF SO, WHY?
>> WELL, THE DECISION TAKEN BY
THE GOVERNMENT EVEN TWO TWO
WEEKS AGO WAS THAT THE MINISTER
OF THE INTERIOR WOULD ACT WHEN
HE SEES IT IS NECESSARY IN
ACCORDANCE WITH THE LAW.
THAT'S REALLY THE OBJECTIVE.
THERE'S NO DESIRE TO CURTAIL ANY
EFFORT TO FIND A SOLUTION TO
THIS.
BUT ULTIMATELY IT HAS TO BE
RESOLVED, EITHER THROUGH
DIALOGUE OR THROUGH THE
ENFORCEMENT OF THE LAW.
>> Warner: HOW LONG REMAINS
BEFORE IT HAS TO BE RESOLVED?
>> NOT VERY LONG.
>> Warner: DAYS?
>> WELL, I'M NOT GOING TO GET
INTO DAYS OF WEEKS BUT I CAN
TELL YOU WE'VE BEEN TRYING TO
RESOLVE IT FOR QUITE A WHILE
NOW.
EVERY EFFORT WILL BE EXERTED TO
RESOLVE IT, THIS IS SOMETHING
THAT WILL HELP EGYPT MOVE ON BUT
ALSO THE COUNTRY NEEDS TO -- THE
GOVERNMENT NEEDS TO EXERT ITS
AUTHORITY AND PROVIDE THE LAYMAN
ON THE STREET FREE ACCESS TO
THEIR HOMES, THAT FACILITIES AND
SO ON AND SO FORT.
WE NEED START UP THE ECONOMY AND
PRESERVE A SENSE OF SECURITY FOR
PEOPLE AS A WHOLE.
THAT CAN'T HAPPEN WHEN THERE IS
THIS PROBLEM WITH SECURITY ON
THE GROUND.
>> Warner: IS THERE A SPLIT
WITHIN THE COALITION GOVERNMENT
ON HOW TO PROCEED WITH THIS?
>> BEFORE SAYING THAT THE
MINISTER OF INTERIOR WAS
MANDATED 6-TO TAKE ACTIONS IN
ACCORDANCE WITH THE LAW.
THAT DID NOT PREEMPT EFFORTS
BEING MADE BY GOOD OFFICERS
INCLUDING U.S. AND E.U. TO FIND
A SOLUTION THROUGH DIALOGUE.
SO THERE'S NO CONTRADICTION
BETWEEN TWO.
BUT THE ONLY THING THAT HAS TO
BE AFFIRMED QUITE CLEARLY IS
THAT WE NEED TO RESOLVE THIS SO
THAT WE CAN MOVE ON AND BUILD
THE COUNTRY IN ACCORDANCE WITH
THE ROAD MAP ADOPTEDDED.
>> Warner: WHAT HAVE THE
UNITED STATES AND EUROPEANS BEEN
TELLING YOUR GOVERNMENT
PRIVATELY?
ARE THEY WARNING A VIOLENT
CRACKDOWN COULD COST YOU
INTERNATIONAL SUPPORT, MAYBE
EVEN U.S. MILITARY AID?
>> WHAT THEY HAVE BEEN TELLING
US PRIVATELY IS VERY SIMILAR TO
WHAT THEY'VE BEEN SAYING
PUBLICLY.
THAT A BEST EFFORT SHOULD BE
MADE TO RESOLVING THIS
PEACEFULLY, THAT THAT WOULD BE
THE BEST SOLUTION FOR EVERYONE
AND THEY'VE BEEN URGING US TO BE
PATIENT IN TRYING TO DO THAT.
THEY WERE HERE TRYING TO DO IT,
THOSE EFFORTS, REGRETTABLY, DID
NOT LEAD TO A SUCCESSFUL
CONCLUSION WE'RE NOT -- THERE'S
NO REAL CHALLENGE TO THE LOGIC
THEY'RE PRESENTING.
WE UNDERSTAND IT IS BETTER TO
RESOLVE IT PEACEFULLY BUT IT CAN
NOT BE A STALEMATE THAT
CONTINUES ENDLESSLY.
THAT ALSO HAS TO BE DEALT WITH.
>> Warner: MEANWHILE, HAS YOUR
GOVERNMENT MADE ANY CONCRETE
PROGRESS NEEDED ON THE STEPS TO
RESTORE CIVILIAN DEMOCRACY OR IS
THIS STANDUP OVER THE PROTEST
CAMPS GETTING IN THE WAY?
>> THE COMMITTEE ON THE
CONSTITUTION, THE LEGAL ASPECT
OF IT HAS STARTED ITS WORK
ALREADY.
THE COMMIT TEE ON RECONCILIATION
HAS STARTED ITS WORK ALREADY AND
THE GOVERNMENT ITSELF IS GOING
THROUGH A PROCESS OFIFFERENT LAT
PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS.
BUT I ADMIT TO GET A TRUE
RECONCILIATION WE ARE TRYING TO
ENCOURAGE ALL THE DIFFERENT
FACTORS -- FACTIONS, INCLUDING
THE ISLAMISTS TO PARTICIPATE IN
THIS AND RESOLVING THE STATE
MATE ON THE GROUND WOULD
FACILITATE, IN MY VIEW, THE
RECONCILIATION PROCESS.
AND THAT'S WHY IT HAS TO BE DONE
IN A REASONABLY SHORT PERIOD OF
TIME.
DON'T FORGET THAT THE ROAD MAP
ITSELF HAS A TIME LIMIT OF SEVEN
TO NINE MONTHS.
THAT'S A VERY SHORT PERIOD OF
TIME.
TO WRITE A CONSTITUTION, HAVE
RECONCILIATION AND HOLD TWO
ELECTIONS.
>> Warner: TODAY A MUSLIM
BROTHERHOOD SPOKESMAN WAS QUOTED
AS SAYING THEY WOULD TAKE PART
IN RECONCILIATION TALKS UNDER
CERTAIN CONDITIONS,
QUOTE/UNQUOTE.
IS THERE MOVEMENT ON THAT FRONT?
>> WELL, I KNOW THAT THEY WERE
TRYING TO BRING TOGETHER
DIFFERENT IDEAS AND DIFFERENT
PROPOSALS TO COME UP WITH A
PROCESS TO MOVE FORWARD BASED ON
THE ROAD MAP AND MOVING FORWARD
FROM THE 30th OF JUNE, NOT
MOVING BACKWARDS.
I CAN'T ADDRESS WHAT THE
PROPOSALS ARE THAT ARE BEING
DISCUSSED PRESENTLY AND
HOPEFULLY THERE WILL BE A
SOLUTION BECAUSE WE DO NEED TO
RESOLVE THIS ONE WAY OR THE
OTHER.
>> Warner: ONE OF THE IDEAS
BEING FLOATED IS TO GIVE MORSI
SOME SORT OF A FIG LEAF TO
RECOGNIZE HIS AUTHORITY AS THE
ELECTED PRESIDENT BEFORE HE
HANDS IT OVER.
IS SOMETHING LIKE THAT A
WORKABLE COMPROMISE?
>> AGAIN, MARGARET, I'M NOT --
I'M MANY TIN SISTER OF FOREIGN
AFFAIRS, MY FOCUS IS ON FOREIGN
POLICY.
THAT'S MY FIRST POINT.
THE SECOND POINT IS TALKS ARE
ONGOING BUT ANYTHING THAT
ATTEMPTS TO REWRITE HISTORY
RATHER THAN MOVE FORWARD FROM
THE 30th OF JUNE ONWARDS
WOULD NOT CARRY MUCH WATER,
FRANKLY.
>> Warner: U.S. SENATORS
McCAIN AND GRAHAM SAID IT'S
UNREALISTIC TO EXPECT DIALOGUE
AS LONG AS MORSI AND OTHER
POLITICAL PRISONERS ARE BEING
DETAINED.
ARE THEY RIGHT ABOUT THAT?
WHY HAVEN'T THEY BEEN RELEASED?
>> THE CASES THAT HAVE BEEN
BROUGHT AGAINST DIFFERENT MUSLIM
BROTHERHOOD LEADERS, INCLUDING
THE PRESIDENT, ARE CASES RELATED
TO CRIMINAL OFFENSES NOT TO
POLITICAL OFFENSES.
>> Warner: BUT IF SOMEBODY IS
ONLY BEING INVESTIGATED AND
HASN'T BEEN CHARGED WHY DETAIN
ANYMORE THE MEANTIME?
>> THERE'S A PROCESS WHERE ONCE
THE INVESTIGATION STARTS THE
INVESTIGATING JUDGE OR IF IT'S A
SPECIAL JUDGE IN ACCORDANCE WITH
THE NORMAL COURTS, BY THE WAY,
HE CAN DETERMINE WHETHER THE
ACCUSED SHOULD BE HELD WHILE THE
PROCESS CONTINUES OR NOT AND
THEY TAKE DECISIONS ON A 15-DAY
BASIS AND THAT'S WHAT'S HAPPENED
SO FAR.
>> Warner: DO YOU THINK ANY
NEW CONSTITUTIONS AND LOGISTICS
WILL BE ACCEPTED BY THE WORLD?
>> IT'S GOING TO BE OPEN,
TRA +*PBGS PARENT AND, AS I SAI,
IT'S AN OPEN INVITATION FOR
EVERYONE TO PARTICIPATE.
WE WOULD HOPE IT ALLOWS FOR A
PROCESS WHERE ARE WHERE ALL
EGYPTIANS WORK TOGETHER, EGYPT
WILL NOT ONLY BE -- CANNOT ONLY
BE FOR ISLAMISTS, IT CAN NOT
ONLY BE FOR SECULARISTS, IT HAS
TO INVOLVE EVERYONE, BUT IT HAS
TO BE BASED ON BUILDING AN
INCLUSIVE SOCIETY FOR THE
FUTURE.
IT CAN'T BE EXCLUSIVE POLITICS
AND IT CAN'T BE A PROCESS THAT
IS NOT TRANSPARENT, DOES NOT
RESPOND TO THE INTEREST OF THE
PEOPLE.
SO I WOULD HOPE THAT WE HAVE
EVERYBODY PARTICIPATING AND THE
DOOR WILL REMAIN OPEN.
>> Warner: FOREIGN MINISTER
NABIL FAHMY, THANK YOU FOR
JOINING US.
>> YOU'RE WELCOME, MARGARET.
>> Brown: A MAJOR EXPERIMENT IS
UNDER WAY IN AMERICAN PUBLIC
EDUCATION, ONE THAT COULD CHANGE
WHAT AND HOW SCHOOLS TEACH.
THE NEWSHOUR'S SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT FOR EDUCATION,
JOHN MERROW, HAS THE FIRST OF A
TWO-PART REPORT ON A NEW SET OF
STANDARDS KNOWN AS THE "COMMON
CORE."
>> Reporter: TODAY, ERIN GARRY'S
EIGHTH GRADE ENGLISH CLASS IS
HAVING A DEBATE, AND ROUND ONE
IS ABOUT TO BEGIN.
>> YOU GUYS CAN START.
>> FREEDOM OF SPEECH SHOULD MEAN
WHAT IT SAYS, FREEDOM OF SPEECH.
>> I DISAGREE.
>> Reporter: STUDENTS IN THE
CENTER OF THE ROOM ARGUE THEIR
CASE.
>> BUT YOU HAVE NO PROOF!
>> Reporter: TEAM MEMBERS ON THE
SIDELINES OFFER SUPPORT.
>> THEY'RE PASSING NOTESAYIN SG,
"YOU SHOULD ASK THIS FOLLOW-UP
QUESTION, OR LOOK AT THIS PAGE
IN YOUR TEXT SO THAT YOU CAN
REFERENCE THIS PIECE OF
EVIDENCE TO SUPPORT YOUR IDEAS."
>> THEY HAVE POWER, BUT WE ALSO
HAVE POWER.
>> Reporter: TO PREPARE FOR THE
DEBATE, THE EIGHTH GRADERS HAVE
READ SEVERAL ARTICLES ABOUT
FREEDOM OF SPEECH.
>> YOU CAN'T JUST SAY WHAT
YOU'RE SAYING BECAUSE YOU FEEL
LIKE THAT'S RIGHT.
YOU NEED TO HAVE EVIDENCE ABOUT
IT.
>> YOU SAID THAT THE GOVERNMENT,
THAT WE HAVE MORE POWER THAN THE
GOVERNMENT.
>> Reporter: TEACHER ERIN GARRY
KEEPS SCORE.
>> KIDS COLLECT POINTS FOR USING
CERTAIN DISCUSSION SKILLS
ACCORDING TO THE COMMON CORE
STANDARDS.
>> Reporter: THE COMMON CORE
STANDARDS HAVE BEEN ADOPTED BY
HER STATE, NEW YORK, 44 OTHER
STATES AND THE DISTRICT OF
COLUMBIA.
THE NEW STANDARDS EXPECT A LOT
MORE FROM STUDENTS AND TEACHERS.
>> YOU HAVE SO MANY DIFFERENT
SKILLS THAT YOU'RE EXPLORING IN
THAT ONE ACTIVITY.
>> Reporter: SHAEL POLAKOW-
SURANSKY IS NEW YORK CITY'S
CHIEF ACADEMIC OFFICER.
>> YOU'RE GETTING KIDS TO DEFEND
THEIR IDEAS, TO SPEAK
PERSUASIVELY, TO ANALYZE THE
PRESENTATIONS THAT THEIR PEERS
ARE MAKING, USING EVIDENCE FROM
NONFICTION TEXTS.
>> Reporter: IS THAT WHAT THE
COMMON CORE HOLDS IN THE FUTURE,
THAT KIND OF TEACHING?
>> YES.
CRITICAL THINKING IS THE... AT
THE HEART OF THIS.
WORKING IN TEAMS AND
COLLABORATING IS AT THE HEART OF
THIS.
>> Reporter: SO, BEFORE THE
COMMON CORE, WHAT WAS THE
SITUATION?
>> EVERY STATE HAD ITS OWN
STANDARDS.
IF YOU WENT TO MASSACHUSETTS,
YOU HAD SOME PRETTY RIGOROUS,
TOUGH STANDARDS.
ALABAMA OR LOUISIANA, NOT SO
MUCH.
>> STUDENTS WERE LEARNING
DIFFERENT THINGS IN FLORIDA,
FROM WHAT THEY WERE LEARNING IN
NEW YORK CITY, FROM WHAT THEY
WERE LEARNING IN NEBRASKA, AND
EVEN WHAT THEY WERE LEARNING IN
EACH SCHOOL IN NEW YORK CITY.
>> Reporter: TO CLEAR UP THE
CONFUSION, SOME GOVERNORS AND
STATE SUPERINTENDENTS DEVELOPED
A COMMON SET OF STANDARDS WHICH
STATES COULD CHOOSE TO ADOPT OR
NOT.
FROM THE BEGINNING, THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION PUSHED THE STATES
TO ADOPT THEM.
>> WE LAID OUT A FEW KEY
CRITERIA AND SAID, "IF YOU MEET
THESE TESTS, WE'LL REWARD YOU BY
HELPING YOU REFORM YOUR
SCHOOLS."
>> Reporter: THE REWARD WAS
SIGNIFICANT: HUNDREDS OF
MILLIONS OF DOLLARS TO STATES
THAT PLEDGED TO DO WHAT
WASHINGTON WANTED.
STATES COMPETED FOR A SHARE OF
THE $4.35 BILLION IN WHAT
WASHINGTON CALLS "RACE TO THE
TOP."
>> GOVERNOR WERE NERVOUS.
( LAUGHS )
>> Reporter: 46 STATES AND THE
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA PRESENTED
AMBITIOUS PLANS.
>> OH, WE BELIEVE LOUISIANA IS
ONE OF THE TOP CANDIDATES FOR
THIS.
I MEAN, WE HAVE SUCH EXCITING
REFORM GOING ON.
>> Reporter: ONLY A HANDFUL OF
STATES HAVE ACTUALLY WON FEDERAL
MONEY, BUT MOST HAVE FALLEN IN
LINE AND ADOPTED THE COMMON
CORE.
THE COMMON CORE STANDARDS ARE
ONLY THE "WHAT."
THEY DESCRIBE WHAT STUDENTS
SHOULD KNOW AND BE ABLE TO DO AT
EACH GRADE LEVEL.
THEY'RE NOT THE "HOW."
HOW THE STANDARDS ARE TAUGHT,
WHAT HAPPENS IN CLASSROOMS,
THAT'S THE CURRICULUM.
DEVELOPING AND SELLING
CURRICULUM MATERIALS IS A
BILLION-DOLLAR BUSINESS, BUT
SOME STATES, INCLUDING NEW YORK,
ARE HARNESSING THEIR OWN
RESOURCES.
>> WE STARTED BY ASKING OUR
TEHERSAC TO BUILD CURRICULUM
UNITS, AND THE BEST ONES GO UP
ON OUR COMMON CORE LIBRARY AS
MODELS.
>> Reporter: BOTH NEW YORK CITY
AND NEW YORK STATE OFFER FREE
COMMON CORE LESSON PLANS
DEVELOPED BY TEACHERS.
>> LAST OCTOBER, ONE WENT UP.
IT WAS SO POPULAR, IN... IN ONE
DAY, THERE WERE 3,000 DOWNLOADS.
>> Reporter: SURANSKY EXPECTS
TEACHERS TO TEACH DIFFERENTLY.
NEW YORK CITY SELECTED 35
SCHOOLS WHERE ITS HELPING
TEACHERS MAKE THE TRANSITION.
ERIN GARRY TEACHES IN ONE OF
THEM.
>> TWO MINUTES, ONE POLISH, ONE
PRAISE!
WHEN WE STARTED IMPLEMENTING THE
COMMON CORE AT OUR SCHOOL TWO
YEARS AGO, I STARTED GIVING
STUDENTS MORE RESPONSIBILITY
WITHIN THE CLASSROOM SO THAT
THEY CAN BE RESPONSIBLE FOR
THEIR OWN LEARNING.
>> LET'S GET THE MAIN IDEA ABOUT
WHAT WE THINK ABOUT IT, THEN WE
CAN FIND EVIDENCE.
>> I THINK ONE OF THE MOST
IMPORTANT ONES WAS THE LAST ONE.
>> Reporter: JESSIE STARTUP HAS
ALSO MODIFIED HER TEACHING.
>> WITH MATHEMATICS, IT USED TO
BE "THIS IS HOW YOU DO IT.
HERE ARE YOUR STEPS.
IF YOU DON'T DO IT THAT WAY,
YOU'RE WRONG."
WHY YOU THINK THIS GRAPH MATCHES
TO ONE OF THE SITUATIONS HERE?
NOW, THE COMMON CORE SAYS "DO IT
ANY WAY YOU WANT.
JUST BE ABLE TO DO IT AND
JUSTIFY YOUR ANSWER."
SO, STUDENTS COULD DRAW A
PICTURE TO FIGURE OUT AN ANSWER,
SET UP AN EQUATION, MAKE A
TABLE.
THERE'S A VARIETY OF METHODS TO
DO THE SAME PROBLEM.
>> Reporter: THINGS MAY BE
CHANGING IN A FEW HUNDRED
CLASSROOMS, BUT NEW YORK CITY
HAS 75,000 TEACHERS.
BRENDA CARTAGENA HAS 13 YEARS OF
TEACHING EXPERIENCE.
SHE SAYS MANY TEACHERS,
ESPECIALLY NEW ONES, ARE FEELING
OVERWHELMED.
>> WE WERE NOT GIVEN CURRICULUM
AND SAID "THIS IS WHAT YOU GUYS
ARE GOING TO DO."
THEY JUST TOLD US, "THIS IS THE
EXPECTATION, AND YOU FIGURE IT
OUT!"
>> Reporter: HOW FAR ARE YOU TO
CHANGING THE TEACHING TO LINE IT
UP WITH THE COMMON CORE?
>> I THINK WE'RE ABOUT HALFWAY
THERE.
>> Reporter: HIGHER STANDARDS,
INNOVATIVE CURRICULUM AND
CHANGES IN TEACHING ARE THREE
ASPECTS OF WHAT COULD BE A SEA
CHANGE IN AMERICA'S SCHOOLS.
AS CHALLENGING AS THEY ARE, THE
FINAL PART-- TESTING TO FIND OUT
IF ALL OF THIS IS WORKING-- MAY
BE THE HIGHEST HURDLE OF ALL.
REEN KENTUCKY TESTED COMMON CO
SKILLS LAST YEAR, SCORES FELL 30
PERCENTILE POINTS.
IS THIS TEST A HIGH-STAKES TEST
FOR YOU, THE TEACHER?
>> YEP.
IF MY STUDENTS BOMB THE TEST,
THAT LOOKS VERY, VERY BAD FOR
ME.
>> AND IN FIRST PLACE WITH 66
POINTS IS TEAM SIX.
( APPLAUSE )
>> Reporter: SCHOOLS, STUDENTS
AND TEACHERS WILL HAVE THIS YEAR
AND THE NEX
SERIOUS TESTING BEGINS IN 2015.
>> Woodruff: ONLINE, JOHN'S TEAM
AT LEARNING MATTERS HAS AN
EXTENDED INTERVIEW WITH THE
COMMISSIONER OF EDUCATION FOR
THE STATE OF NEW YORK.
NEWLY RELEASED TEST SCORES THERE
HAVE RAISED MANY QUESTIONS ABOUT
THE COMMON CORE.
AND IN HIS SECOND STORY TOMORROW
NIGHT, JOHN EXAMINES MORE
QUESTIONS AND CONCERNS ABOUT
TESTING FOR THESE NEW STANDARDS.
>> Brown: AND FINALLY TONIGHT,
THE MADE-FOR-TV STORY OF 16
LOTTERY WINNERS IN NEW JERSEY.
THEY CALL THEMSELVES "OCEAN'S
16," A PLAY ON THE MOVIE TITLE
FOR THE OCEAN COUNTY EMPLOYEES
WHO HIT IT BIG LAST WEEK,
WINNING ONE-THIRD OF A $448
MILLION POWERBALL JACKPOT.
THE NINE WOMEN AND SEVEN MEN
WORK IN THE COUNTY'S VEHICLE
MAINTENANCE DEPARTMENT AND
BOUGHT THE TICKET AT THE ACME
SUPERMARKET IN LITTLE EGG HARBOR
TOWNSHIP, JUST A FEW MILES FROM
WHERE SUPERSTORM SANDY HIT LAST
FALL.
THEY STEPPED FORWARD TODAY AT A
NEWS CONFERENCE, ONE OF THEM
PROUDLY WAVING A MOCK CHECK MADE
OUT FOR MORE THAN $86 MILLION
THE LUMP SUM VALUE OF THEIR
TICKET.
LOTTERY SPOKESWOMAN JUDITH
DRUCKER SAID EACH WILL TAKE HOME
$3.8 MILLION AFTER TAXES.
>> IF WE WERE GOING TO HAVE A
HOLLYWOOD SCRIPT WRITER WRITE
THE STORY OF 16 HARD-WORKING
PEOPLE IN OCEAN COUNTY, MANY OF
WHOM HAD A LOT OF DAMAGE TO
THEIR HOMES, WE ALL IN  THE THAE
DAUGHTER OF THE MAN WHO WROTE
THE LOTTERY LAW IN NEW JERSEY,
NOBODY WOULD BUY THIS STORY
BECAUSE THEY WOULD SAY IT'S NOT
TRUE.
BUT IT IS TRUE.
>> I COULDN'T BELIEVE IT.
I GOT UP, DID MY USUAL MORNING
THING, I WAS HAVING MY CUP OF
COFFEE, I LOOKED UP THE WINNING
LOTTERY NUMBERS AND I SAW THAT
NUMBER 32 WAS THE POWER BALL AND
I'M, LIKE, 32?
I KNEW THAT WE HAD 32 FOUR
DIFFERENT TIMES BECAUSE WILLIE
HAD BEEN WRITING DOWN HOW MANY
DIFFERENT POWERBALL COMBINATIONS
WE HAD.
(LAUGHTER)
SO I WENT TO MY LUNCHBOX, I GOT
THE PHOTO COPY OF THE -- ALL THE
TICKETS AND I'M GOING THROUGH
THEM, FLIPPED THE PAGE, GO TO
THE SECOND PAGE, SEE 32 AND I'M
LOOKING, HUH?
NO.
I LOOK AGAIN.
I'M, LIKE, NO.
AND I IMMEDIATELY JUST STARTED
SHAKING AND I'M JUST STARING AT
IT AND I DIDN'T KNOW WHAT TO DO.
SO I GOT UP, I WALKED DOWN THE
HALL, I OPENED UP THE BEDROOM
DOOR AND I HAD TO WAKE MY POOR
HUSBAND UP WHO IS NO LONGER
POOR.
(LAUGHTER)
I SAID "PAT?"
AND HE ROLLS OVER.
AND I SAID "I REALLY NEED YOU
WAKE UP."
AND I WALK OVER TO THE SIDE OF
THE BED, TURN LIGHT ON AND I
JUST -- I SAID TO HIM "I THINK
WE WON THE LOTTERY AND I NEED
YOU TO DOUBLE CHECK ME."
AS I'M SHAKING.
I TURN THE LIGHT ON, HE FOCUSES
HIS EYES, HE LOOKS, HE'S LIKE
"OH, MY GOSH."
THEN THE NEXT THING I DID, I
WANTED TO LET EVERYBODY KNOW BUT
I JUST COULDN'T.
I WANTED TO BE POSITIVE.
I SENT A TEXT MESSAGE TO MY
SUPERVISOR, TABITHA, AND SHE
CAME BACK WITH THAT IT WAS A
LITTLE BIT TOO EARLY IN THE
MORNING TO BEES MING WITH HER
LIKE THAT.
(LAUGHTER)
AND I'M, LIKE, YEAH, NO KIDDING.
I'M SHAKING, I NEED YOU TO
DOUBLE CHECK ME.
IN THE MEANTIME, I'VE GOT TO
JUMP IN THE SHOWER TO GET READY
FOR WORK, THEN SHE COMES BACK
WITH "I HAVE IT WITH ME, IT'S ON
MY DESK."
MEANING THE PHOTO COPY OF ALL
THE TICKETS.
I GET DONE TAKING A SHOWER, READ
HER MESSAGE, I GET MY PHONE,
TAKE A PICTURE OF THE PHOTO COPY
OF THE TICKET AND I SEND IT HER
AND SHE COMES BACK WITH O.M.F. G
(LAUGHTER)
AND I FINISHED GETTING READY FOR
WORK AND I WENT TO WORK!
>> IT'S BEEN AN EXTREMELY ROUGH
YEAR.
BUT I DID -- WHEN WE LOST
EVERYTHING, THIS WHOLE GROUP
HERE AND EVERYBODY THAT I WORKED
WITH PULLED TOGETHER AND HELPED
ME THROUGH.
SO THIS HAS BEEN, LIKE, A GREAT
FAMILY FOR ME.
WE LOST OUR HOME IN THE STORM.
I WAS JUST RENTING, I DIDN'T OWN
IT, BUT WE LIVED THERE FOR FIVE
YEARS, ME AND MY DAUGHTER.
SO NOW I STAYED WITH MY BROTHER
FEW A FEW -- FOR A FEW MONTHS
AND GOT A LITTLE APARTMENT ABOVE
A STORE FRONT SO I'M GOING TO
BUY ME AND MY CAUGHT THE ERR
HOME AND BRING MY DOG BACK HOME.
(APPLAUSE)
>> I'M JUST GONNA CONTINUE
WATCHING NASCAR RACING ON
SUNDAY, MAYBE I'LL BE AT MY LOG
CABIN OR MULTIPLE ACRES OF LAND.
(LAUGHTER)
I DON'T WANT TO BE A -- I COULD
STAY UP HERE AND TALK -- I
DIDN'T DO IT.
(LAUGHTER)
>> YOU'RE GONNA PAY FOR IT!
>> I THINK I CAN AFFORD IT.
MAYBE MORE AIR CONDITIONING IN
HERE.
(LAUGHTER)
I WOULD JUST LIKE TO THANK
EVERYBODY.
EVERYBODY'S BEEN SO OVERWHELMING
TO US ALL AND IT'S -- IT'S --
JUST HAPPY, HAPPY, HAPPY.
THANK YOU.
(CHEERS AND APPLAUSE)
>> Brown: THERE WERE TWO OTHER
WINNING TICKETS.
PAUL WHITE OF HAM LAKE,
MINNESOTA, CLAIMED HIS ONE-THIRD
OF THE JACKPOT ON THURSDAY.
THE THIRD TICKET WAS SOLD IN
SOUTH BRUNSWICK, NEW JERSEY,
BUT ITS OWNER HAS NOT COME
FORWARD.
>> Woodruff: IS THAT A
WONDERFUL STORY?
AGAIN, THE MAJOR DEVELOPMENTS OF
THE DAY: THE U.S. JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT AND SEVERAL STATES
SUED TO BLOCK THE MERGER OF
AMERICAN AIRLINES AND U.S.
AIRWAYS; AND ISRAEL ANNOUNCED
IT'S MOVING AHEAD WITH PLANS TO
BUILD NEARLY 900 NEW HOMES IN
EAST JERUSALEM ON THE EVE OF
RENEWED PEACE TALKS.
>> Brown: IMAGINE HIRING PICASSO
TO DESIGN YOUR STAGE SETS.
ONLINE, WE LOOK AT THE LEGACY OF
A BALLET VISIONARY WHO BROUGHT
MODERN ART TO DANCE.
KWAME HOLMAN HAS THE DETAILS.
>> Reporter: AN EXHIBIT AT THE
NATIONAL GALLERY IN WASHINGTON
EXPLORES THE CREATIVE
COLLABORATION OF THE FIRST GREAT
BALLET COMPANY OF THE 20th
CENTURY AND HOW IT STILL
INSPIRES NEW DANCE.
THAT'S ON "ART BEAT."
AND ARE JOB BOARDS LIKE LINKED-
IN CHEATING EMPLOYERS AND JOB
SEEKERS ALIKE?
OUR "ASK THE HEADHUNTER"
COLUMNIST EXPLORES HOW THEY
CHARGE FOR THEIR SERVICES.
THAT'S ON "MAKING SENSE."
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR WEB
SITE, newshour.pbs.org.
JUDY?
>> Woodruff: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
ON WEDNESDAY, WE'LL LOOK AT THE
LATEST ROUND OF PEACE TALKS IN
THE MID-EAST, AND THE LEGACY OF
THE MARCH ON WASHINGTON, 50
YEARS LATER.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Brown: AND I'M JEFFREY BROWN.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
GOOD NIGHT.